---
title: "Basic Regular Expression (regex) usage: Perl, Python, R, Shell, Javascript, C"
date: 2015-11-26
layout: post
---

# {{ page.title }}

This post demonstrage simple regular expression usage in various
programming languages. The examples contains two parts:

1.  Given a simple text string (`chr1   65436543   rsID776`),
    check if it matches a specific pattern.
2.  Extract a value from the string (e.g. extract the `1` from `chr1`)
    using regular-expression groupping.

Regular expression Flavors - there are three common 'flavors' of
regular expression capabilities: `basic`, `extended`, `perl` (or `Perl-Compatible`)
(learn more on the
[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression#Standards](Regex Wikipedia page)).

Generally speaking, the following are the supported flavors for each environment
(examples below):

    grep       => basic
    grep -E    => extended
	grep -P    => Perl (not always supported)
	pcregrep   => Perl
    sed        => basic
    sed -r     => extended (on linux)
    sed -E     => extended (on some macs)
    awk        => extended (on linux), basic (on mac)
    perl       => Perl (aka PCRE = Perl-Compatible Regular Expressions)
    python     => very similar to Perl
    javascript => ECMAScript (similar to Perl)
    standard C => basic or extended
	R          => Perl
	C++11      => ECMAScript (similar to Perl)

### Python

Download [regex-demo.py](./files/regex/regex-demo.py) .

    #!/usr/bin/env python
	import re

    # Python Regex Howto + Syntax
	# https://docs.python.org/2/howto/regex.html
	data = "chr1   65436543   rsID776"


    # Build a Regex Object based on desired pattern
	regex = re.compile('^chr')
	if regex.search(data):
	    print "Found match! line starts with 'chr'"

    # Regex to extract information (ie. 'grouping')
	# Get the number following the 'chr', store in object 'm'
	regex = re.compile('^chr([0-9]+)')
	m = regex.search(data)
	if m:
	     print "found chromosome: ", m.group(1)

### Perl

Download [regex-demo.pl](./files/regex/regex-demo.pl) .

    #!/usr/bin/env perl
	use strict;
	use warnings;

    # Perl Quick Regex Tutorial: http://perldoc.perl.org/perlrequick.html
	# Perl Long Regex Tutorial:  http://perldoc.perl.org/perlretut.html
	# Perl Full Regex Syntax:    http://perldoc.perl.org/perlrequick.html
    my $data = "chr1   65436543   rsID776";

    # Regex to test if string matches
    if ($data =~ m/^chr/) {
	    print "Found match! line starts with 'chr'\n";
	}

    # Regex to extract information (ie. 'grouping')
	# Get the number following the 'chr', store it in '$1'
	if ($data =~ m/^chr([0-9]+)/) {
		print "found chromosome: $1\n";
	}

### Javascript

Download [regex-demo.js](./files/regex/regex-demo.js) .

    #!/usr/bin/env node

    // Javascript Regex Tutorial:
    //   https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Regular_Expressions
    // Javascript Regex Reference:

    var data = "chr1   65436543   rsID776";

    // Test if 'data' matches the regex. returns NULL if no match found.
    if (data.match(/^chr/)) {
        console.log("Found match! line starts with 'chr'");
    }

    // Regex to extract information (ie. 'grouping')
    // Get the number following the 'chr', store it in array 'm'
    // 'm' will be NULL if no match is found.
    var m = data.match(/^chr([0-9]+)/);
    if (m) {
       console.log("found chromosome: ", m[1]);
    }

### Shell

Download [regex-demo.sh](./files/regex/regex-demo.sh) .

    #!/bin/sh

    # NOTE:
    # 'grep -E' to use Extended Regular expression in grep (the default is 'basic').
    #
    # 'sed -r' to use Extended regular expressions in sed
    #          (sadly does not work on Mac).

    data="chr1   65436543   rsID776"

    # option 1: print lines that match the regex
    echo "Matching lines:"
    echo "$data" | grep -E '^chr'

    # option 2: just check if there is a match and print nothing
    # 'grep -q' means 'quiet' (don't print anything)
    if echo "$data" | grep -q -E '^chr' ; then
    	echo 'Found match! line starts with 'chr'\n'
    fi

    # sed trick:
    # The regex will find:
    #   1. lines starting with 'chr'
    #   2. followed by digits
    #   3. then anything (.*)
    # And will be replaced by whatever was found in the parenthesis group
    echo "found chromosome: "
    echo "$data" | sed -r 's/^chr([0-9]*).*/\1/'

### C

Download [regex-demo.c](./files/regex/regex-demo.c) .

    /*
     to compile:
         cc -Wall -g -o regex-demo regex-demo.c
     to run:
         ./regex-demo
    */
    #include <string.h>
    #include <regex.h>
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <assert.h>

    int main()
    {
        const char *data = "chr1   65436543   rsID776";
        regex_t re;
        #define MAX_MATCHES (10)
        regmatch_t matches[MAX_MATCHES];

        // Compile the regex
        int i = regcomp(&re,"^chr",REG_EXTENDED);
        assert (i==0);

        // Test it on the string
        i = regexec(&re, data, 0, NULL, 0);
        if (i != REG_NOMATCH) {
    	printf("Found match! line starts with 'chr'\n");
        }
        regfree(&re);


        // Compile a regex with grouping
        i = regcomp(&re,"^chr([0-9]+)",REG_EXTENDED);
        assert (i==0);

        // Test it, results will be stored in 'matches'
        i = regexec(&re, data, MAX_MATCHES, (regmatch_t*)&matches, 0);
        if ( i != REG_NOMATCH ) {
            // matches[1].rm_so => start-offset of match
            // matches[1].rm_eo => end-offset of match
            const int len = matches[1].rm_eo - matches[1].rm_so;
            const char *ptr = data + matches[1].rm_so;
            // extract the matched value into a new string
            char *val = strndup(ptr, len);
            printf("found chromosome: %s\n", val);
    	free(val);
        }
        regfree(&re);

        return 0;
    }

### C++ (using the c++11 standard)

Download [regex-demo.cpp](./files/regex/regex-demo.cpp) .

    /*
     NOTE:
        Using std::regex requires g++>=4.9 or a recent enough clang.
     to compile:
         c++ -std=c++11 -Wall -g -o regex-demo-cpp regex-demo.cpp
     to run:
         ./regex-demo-cpp
    */
    #include <iostream>
    #include <string>
    #include <regex>

    using namespace std;

    /*
	NOTES:
    std::regex_match => requires the ENTIRE string to match the regex
                        (as if with '^' and '$' anchors).
    std::regex_search => match any part of the string.

	The above funtions accepts a 'flags' parameter specifing the regex flavor,
	defaulting to EMCAScript if none is given.
	See: http://www.cplusplus.com/reference/regex/regex_constants/
	     http://www.cplusplus.com/reference/regex/ECMAScript/
    */

    int main()
    {
        const string data("chr1   65436543   rsID776");

        const regex re("^chr");
        if (std::regex_search(data,re)) {
            cout << "Found match! line starts with 'chr'" << endl;
        }

        const regex re2("^chr(\\d+)");
        smatch matches;
        if (regex_search(data,matches,re2)) {
            cout << "found chromosome: " << matches[1] << endl;
        }

        return 0;
    }


### R

    ## example 1: check if a string matches a regular expression pattern

    # A vector with three character strings
    data = c("chr1   65436543   rsID776",
	         "foo bar",
			 "chr2   123456     rsID531431")

    # 'grep' returns a vector of the indices of matching elements
    grep('^chr',data,perl=T)
	#
    # Output: c(1, 3)
	# meaning: data[1] and data[3] matched '^chr' .


    # 'grepl' returns a vector of TRUE/FALSE for each element
	# in the input vector.
    grepl('^chr',data,perl=T)
    #
    # Output: c(TRUE, FALSE, TRUE)


    ## example 2: extract value using regex grouping
    data = "chr1   65436543   rsID776"
    tmp = regexec('^chr(\\d+)',data)
    res = regmatches(data,tmp)[[1]]

    # The first element is the entire match
    > res[1]
    [1] "chr1"

    # The second element is the content of the matched group
    > res[2]
    [1] "1"


### pcregrep

`pcrerep` (**P**erl **C**ompatible **R**egular **E**xpression grep) is
a command-line utilitry available on most modern unixes. It supports
perl-style regular expressions (e.g. with `\d` and `\s`, which are not
supported in standard GREP), and also allows printing the value of the
matched groups directly:

    $ echo "chr1 65436543 rsID776" | pcregrep -o1 '^chr(\d+)'
	1

The parameter `-o1` means print the content of the first matched
group (the value matching `(\d+)` - which is `1` in the above example).


To install, try:

1. `sudo apt-get install pcregrep` on Ubuntu/Debian
2. `sudo yum install pcregrep` on Redhat/Centos
3. `sudo brew install pcre` on Mac OS X with homebrew.

